Chapter I 

AN UNEXPECTED PARTY 

In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit. Not a nasty, dirty, wet hole, filled with the ends of worms 
and an oozy smell, nor yet a dry, bare, sandy hole with nothing in it to sit down on or to eat: it was a 
hobbit-hole, and that means comfort. 

It had a perfectly round door like a porthole, painted green, with a shiny yellow brass knob in the 
exact middle. The door opened on to a tube-shaped hall like a tunnel: a very comfortable tunnel 
without smoke, with panelled walls, and floors tiled and carpeted, provided with polished chairs, and 
lots and lots of pegs for hats and coats — the hobbit was fond of visitors. The tunnel wound on and on, 
going fairly but not quite straight into the side of the hill — The Hill, as all the people for many miles 
round called it — and many little round doors opened out of it, first on one side and then on another. No 
going upstairs for the hobbit: bedrooms, bathrooms, cellars, pantries (lots of these), wardrobes (he had 
whole rooms devoted to clothes), kitchens, dining-rooms, all were on the same floor, and indeed on 
the same passage. The best rooms were all on the left-hand side (going in), for these were the only 
ones to have windows, deep-set round windows looking over his garden, and meadows beyond, sloping 
down to the river. 

This hobbit was a very well-to-do hobbit, and his name was Baggins. The Bagginses had lived in 
the neighbourhood of The Hill for time out of mind, and people considered them very respectable, not 
only because most of them were rich, but also because they never had any adventures or did anything 
unexpected: you could tell what a Baggins would say on any question without the bother of asking 
him. This is a story of how a Baggins had an adventure, and found himself doing and saying things 
altogether unexpected. He may have lost the neighbours’ respect, but he gained — well, you will see 
whether he gained anything in the end. 

The mother of our particular hobbit — what is a hobbit? I suppose hobbits need some description 
nowadays, since they have become rare and shy of the Big People, as they call us. They are (or were) a 
little people, about half our height, and smaller than the bearded Dwarves. Hobbits have no beards. 
There is little or no magic about them, except the ordinary everyday sort which helps them to 
disappear quietly and quickly when large stupid folk like you and me come blundering along, making 
a noise like elephants which they can hear a mile off. They are inclined to be fat in the stomach; they 
dress in bright colours (chiefly green and yellow); wear no shoes, because their feet grow natural 
leathery soles and thick warm brown hair like the stuff on their heads (which is curly); have long 
clever brown fingers, good-natured faces, and laugh deep fruity laughs (especially after dinner, which 
they have twice a day when they can get it). Now you know enough to go on with. As I was saying, the 
mother of this hobbit — of Bilbo Baggins, that is — was the famous Belladonna Took, one of the three 
remarkable daughters of the Old Took, head of the hobbits who lived across The Water, the small river 
that ran at the foot of The Hill. It was often said (in other families) that long ago one of the Took 
ancestors must have taken a fairy wife. That was, of course, absurd, but certainly there was still 
something not entirely hobbitlike about them, and once in a while members of the Took-clan would go 
and have adventures. They discreetly disappeared, and the family hushed it up; but the fact remained 


that the Tooks were not as respectable as the Bagginses, though they were undoubtedly richer. 

Not that Belladonna Took ever had any adventures after she became Mrs. Bungo Baggins. Bungo, 
that was Bilbo’s father, built the most luxurious hobbit-hole for her (and partly with her money) that 
was to be found either under The Hill or over The Hill or across The Water, and there they remained to 
the end of their days. Still it is probable that Bilbo, her only son, although he looked and behaved 
exactly like a second edition of his solid and comfortable father, got something a bit queer in his 
make-up from the Took side, something that only waited for a chance to come out. The chance never 
arrived, until Bilbo Baggins was grown up, being about fifty years old or so, and living in the beautiful 
hobbit-hole built by his father, which I have just described for you, until he had in fact apparently 
settled down immovably. 

By some curious chance one morning long ago in the quiet of the world, when there was less noise 
and more green, and the hobbits were still numerous and prosperous, and Bilbo Baggins was standing 
at his door after breakfast smoking an enormous long wooden pipe that reached nearly down to his 
woolly toes (neatly brushed) — Gandalf came by. Gandalf ! If you had heard only a quarter of what I 
have heard about him, and I have only heard very little of all there is to hear, you would be prepared 
for any sort of remarkable tale. Tales and adventures sprouted up all over the place wherever he went, 
in the most extraordinary fashion. He had not been down that way under The Hill for ages and ages, 
not since his friend the Old Took died, in fact, and the hobbits had almost forgotten what he looked 
like. He had been away over The Hill and across The Water on businesses of his own since they were 
all small hobbit-boys and hobbit-girls. 

All that the unsuspecting Bilbo saw that morning was an old man with a staff. He had a tall pointed 
blue hat, a long grey cloak, a silver scarf over which his long white beard hung down below his waist, 
and immense black boots. 

“Good Morning!” said Bilbo, and he meant it. The sun was shining, and the grass was very green. 
But Gandalf looked at him from under long bushy eyebrows that stuck out further than the brim of his 
shady hat. 

“What do you mean?” he said. “Do you wish me a good morning, or mean that it is a good morning 
whether I want it or not; or that you feel good this morning; or that it is a morning to be good on?” 

“All of them at once,” said Bilbo. “And a very fine morning for a pipe of tobacco out of doors, into 
the bargain. If you have a pipe about you, sit down and have a fill of mine! There’s no hurry, we have 
all the day before us!” Then Bilbo sat down on a seat by his door, crossed his legs, and blew out a 
beautiful grey ring of smoke that sailed up into the air without breaking and floated away over The 
Hill. 

“Very pretty!” said Gandalf. “But I have no time to blow smoke-rings this morning. I am looking 
for someone to share in an adventure that I am arranging, and it’s very difficult to find anyone.” 

“I should think so — in these parts! We are plain quiet folk and have no use for adventures. Nasty 
disturbing uncomfortable things! Make you late for dinner! I can’t think what anybody sees in them,” 
said our Mr. Baggins, and stuck one thumb behind his braces, and blew out another even bigger 
smokering. Then he took out his morning letters, and began to read, pretending to take no more notice 
of the old man. He had decided that he was not quite his sort, and wanted him to go away. But the old 
man did not move. He stood leaning on his stick and gazing at the hobbit without saying anything, till 
Bilbo got quite uncomfortable and even a little cross. 

“Good morning!” he said at last. “We don’t want any adventures here, thank you! You might try 
over The Hill or across The Water.” By this he meant that the conversation was at an end. 

“What a lot of things you do use Good morning for!” said Gandalf. “Now you mean that you want 



to get rid of me, and that it won’t be good till I move off.” 

“Not at all, not at all, my dear sir! Let me see, I don’t think I know your name?” 

“Yes, yes, my dear sir — and I do know your name, Mr. Bilbo Baggins. And you do know my name, 
though you don’t remember that I belong to it. I am Gandalf, and Gandalf means me! To think that I 
should have lived to be good-morninged by Belladonna Took’s son, as if I was selling buttons at the 
door!” 

“Gandalf, Gandalf! Good gracious me! Not the wandering wizard that gave Old Took a pair of 
magic diamond studs that fastened themselves and never came undone till ordered? Not the fellow 
who used to tell such wonderful tales at parties, about dragons and goblins and giants and the rescue of 
princesses and the unexpected luck of widows’ sons? Not the man that used to make such particularly 
excellent fireworks! I remember those! Old Took used to have them on Midsummer’s Eve. Splendid! 
They used to go up like great lilies and snapdragons and laburnums of fire and hang in the twilight all 
evening!” You will notice already that Mr. Baggins was not quite so prosy as he liked to believe, also 
that he was very fond of flowers. “Dear me!” he went on. “Not the Gandalf who was responsible for so 
many quiet lads and lasses going off into the Blue for mad adventures? Anything from climbing trees 
to visiting elves — or sailing in ships, sailing to other shores! Bless me, life used to be quite inter — I 
mean, you used to upset things badly in these parts once upon a time. I beg your pardon, but I had no 
idea you were still in business.” 

“Where else should I be?” said the wizard. “All the same I am pleased to find you remember 
something about me. You seem to remember my fireworks kindly, at any rate, and that is not without 
hope. Indeed for your old grandfather Took’s sake, and for the sake of poor Belladonna, I will give 
you what you asked for.” 

“I beg your pardon, I haven’t asked for anything!” 

“Yes, you have! Twice now. My pardon. I give it you. In fact I will go so far as to send you on this 
adventure. Very amusing for me, very good for you — and profitable too, very likely, if you ever get 
over it.” 

“Sorry! I don’t want any adventures, thank you. Not today. Good morning! But please come to tea 
— any time you like! Why not tomorrow? Come tomorrow! Good bye!” With that the hobbit turned 
and scuttled inside his round green door, and shut it as quickly as he dared, not to seem rude. Wizards 
after all are wizards. 

“What on earth did I ask him to tea for!” he said to himself, as he went to the pantry. He had only 
just had breakfast, but he thought a cake or two and a drink of something would do him good after his 
fright. 

Gandalf in the meantime was still standing outside the door, and laughing long but quietly. After a 
while he stepped up, and with the spike on his staff scratched a queer sign on the hobbit’s beautiful 
green front-door. Then he strode away, just about the time when Bilbo was finishing his second cake 
and beginning to think that he had escaped adventures very well. 

The next day he had almost forgotten about Gandalf. He did not remember things very well, unless 
he put them down on his Engagement Tablet: like this: Gandalf Tea Wednesday. Yesterday he had 
been too flustered to do anything of the kind. 

Just before tea-time there came a tremendous ring on the front-door bell, and then he remembered! 
He rushed and put on the kettle, and put out another cup and saucer, and an extra cake or two, and ran 
to the door. 

“I am so sorry to keep you waiting!” he was going to say, when he saw that it was not Gandalf at 
all. It was a dwarf with a blue beard tucked into a golden belt, and very bright eyes under his dark- 



green hood. As soon as the door was opened, he pushed inside, just as if he had been expected. 

He hung his hooded cloak on the nearest peg, and “Dwalin at your service!” he said with a low 
bow. 

“Bilbo Baggins at yours!” said the hobbit, too surprised to ask any questions for the moment. When 
the silence that followed had become uncomfortable, he added: “I am just about to take tea; pray come 
and have some with me.” A little stiff perhaps, but he meant it kindly. And what would you do, if an 
uninvited dwarf came and hung his things up in your hall without a word of explanation? 

They had not been at table long, in fact they had hardly reached the third cake, when there came 
another even louder ring at the bell. 

“Excuse me!” said the hobbit, and off he went to the door. 

“So you have got here at last!” That was what he was going to say to Gandalf this time. But it was 
not Gandalf. Instead there was a very old-looking dwarf on the step with a white beard and a scarlet 
hood; and he too hopped inside as soon as the door was open, just as if he had been invited. 

“I see they have begun to arrive already,” he said when he caught sight of Dwalin’ s green hood 
hanging up. He hung his red one next to it, and “Balin at your service!” he said with his hand on his 
breast. 

“Thank you!” said Bilbo with a gasp. It was not the correct thing to say, but they have begun to 
arrive had flustered him badly. He liked visitors, but he liked to know them before they arrived, and 
he preferred to ask them himself. He had a horrible thought that the cakes might run short, and then he 
— as the host: he knew his duty and stuck to it however painful — he might have to go without. 

“Come along in, and have some tea!” he managed to say after taking a deep breath. 

“A little beer would suit me better, if it is all the same to you, my good sir,” said Balin with the 
white beard. “But I don’t mind some cake — seed-cake, if you have any.” 

“Lots!” Bilbo found himself answering, to his own surprise; and he found himself scuttling off, 
too, to the cellar to fill a pint beer-mug, and then to a pantry to fetch two beautiful round seed-cakes 
which he had baked that afternoon for his after-supper morsel. 

When he got back Balin and Dwalin were talking at the table like old friends (as a matter of fact 
they were brothers). Bilbo plumped down the beer and the cake in front of them, when loud came a 
ring at the bell again, and then another ring. 

“Gandalf for certain this time,” he thought as he puffed along the passage. But it was not. It was 
two more dwarves, both with blue hoods, silver belts, and yellow beards; and each of them carried a 
bag of tools and a spade. In they hopped, as soon as the door began to open — Bilbo was hardly 
surprised at all. 

“What can I do for you, my dwarves?” he said. 

“Kili at your service!” said the one. “And Fili!” added the other; and they both swept off their blue 
hoods and bowed. 

“At yours and your family’s!” replied Bilbo, remembering his manners this time. 

“Dwalin and Balin here already, I see,” said Kili. “Let us join the throng!” 

“Throng!” thought Mr. Baggins. “I don’t like the sound of that. I really must sit down for a minute 
and collect my wits, and have a drink.” He had only just had a sip — in the corner, while the four 
dwarves sat round the table, and talked about mines and gold and troubles with the goblins, and the 
depredations of dragons, and lots of other things which he did not understand, and did not want to, for 
they sounded much too adventurous — when, ding-dong-a-ling-dang, his bell rang again, as if some 
naughty little hobbit-boy was trying to pull the handle off. 

“Someone at the door!” he said, blinking. 



“Some four, I should say by the sound,” said Fili. “Besides, we saw them coming along behind us 
in the distance.” 

The poor little hobbit sat down in the hall and put his head in his hands, and wondered what had 
happened, and what was going to happen, and whether they would all stay to supper. Then the bell 
rang again louder than ever, and he had to run to the door. It was not four after all, it was five. Another 
dwarf had come along while he was wondering in the hall. He had hardly turned the knob, before they 
were all inside, bowing and saying “at your service” one after another. Dori, Nori, Ori, Oin, and Gloin 
were their names; and very soon two purple hoods, a grey hood, a brown hood, and a white hood were 
hanging on the pegs, and off they marched with their broad hands stuck in their gold and silver belts to 
join the others. Already it had almost become a throng. Some called for ale, and some for porter, and 
one for coffee, and all of them for cakes; so the hobbit was kept very busy for a while. 

A big jug of coffee had just been set in the hearth, the seed-cakes were gone, and the dwarves were 
starting on a round of buttered scones, when there came — a loud knock. Not a ring, but a hard rat-tat 
on the hobbit’s beautiful green door. Somebody was banging with a stick! 

Bilbo rushed along the passage, very angry, and altogether bewildered and bewuthered — this was 
the most awkward Wednesday he ever remembered. He pulled open the door with a jerk, and they all 
fell in, one on top of the other. More dwarves, four more! And there was Gandalf behind, leaning on 
his staff and laughing. He had made quite a dent on the beautiful door; he had also, by the way, 
knocked out the secret mark that he had put there the morning before. 

“Carefully! Carefully!” he said. “It is not like you, Bilbo, to keep friends waiting on the mat, and 
then open the door like a pop-gun! Let me introduce Bifur, Bofur, Bombur, and especially Thorin!” 

“At your service!” said Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur standing in a row. Then they hung up two yellow 
hoods and a pale green one; and also a sky-blue one with a long silver tassel. This last belonged to 
Thorin, an enormously important dwarf, in fact no other than the great Thorin Oakenshield himself, 
who was not at all pleased at falling flat on Bilbo’s mat with Bifur, Bofur, and Bombur on top of him. 
For one thing Bombur was immensely fat and heavy. Thorin indeed was very haughty, and said 
nothing about service; but poor Mr. Baggins said he was sorry so many times, that at last he grunted 
“pray don’t mention it,” and stopped frowning. 

“Now we are all here!” said Gandalf, looking at the row of thirteen hoods — the best detachable 
party hoods — and his own hat hanging on the pegs. “Quite a merry gathering! I hope there is 
something left for the late-comers to eat and drink! What’s that? Tea! No thank you! A little red wine, 
I think for me.” 

“And for me,” said Thorin. 

“And raspberry jam and apple-tart,” said Bifur. 

“And mince-pies and cheese,” said Bofur. 

“And pork-pie and salad,” said Bombur. 

“And more cakes — and ale — and coffee, if you don’t mind,” called the other dwarves through the 
door. 

“Put on a few eggs, there’s a good fellow!” Gandalf called after him, as the hobbit stumped off to 
the pantries. “And just bring out the cold chicken and pickles!” 

“Seems to know as much about the inside of my larders as I do myself!” thought Mr. Baggins, who 
was feeling positively flummoxed, and was beginning to wonder whether a most wretched adventure 
had not come right into his house. By the time he had got all the bottles and dishes and knives and 
forks and glasses and plates and spoons and things piled up on big trays, he was getting very hot, and 
red in the face, and annoyed. 



“Confusticate and bebother these dwarves!” he said aloud. “Why don’t they come and lend a 
hand?” Lo and behold! there stood Balin and Dwalin at the door of the kitchen, and Fili and Kili 
behind them, and before he could say knife they had whisked the trays and a couple of small tables 
into the parlour and set out everything afresh. 

Gandalf sat at the head of the party with the thirteen dwarves all round: and Bilbo sat on a stool at 
the fireside, nibbling at a biscuit (his appetite was quite taken away), and trying to look as if this was 
all perfectly ordinary and not in the least an adventure. The dwarves ate and ate, and talked and talked, 
and time got on. At last they pushed their chairs back, and Bilbo made a move to collect the plates and 
glasses. 

“I suppose you will all stay to supper?” he said in his politest unpressing tones. 

“Of course!” said Thorin. “And after. We shan’t get through the business till late, and we must 
have some music first. Now to clear up!” 

Thereupon the twelve dwarves — not Thorin, he was too important, and stayed talking to Gandalf — 
jumped to their feet, and made tall piles of all the things. Off they went, not waiting for trays, 
balancing columns of plates, each with a bottle on the top, with one hand, while the hobbit ran after 
them almost squeaking with fright: “please be careful!” and “please, don’t trouble! I can manage.” But 
the dwarves only started to sing: 


Chip the glasses and crack the plates! 

Blunt the knives and bend the forks! 
That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates- 
Smash the bottles and burn the corks! 


Cut the cloth and tread on the fat! 

Pour the milk on the pantry floor! 
Leave the bones on the bedroom mat! 
Splash the wine on every door! 


Dump the crocks in a boiling bowl; 

Pound them up with a thumping pole; 
And when you’ve finished, if any are whole, 
Send them down the hall to roll! 


That’s what Bilbo Baggins hates! 

So, carefully! carefully with the plates! 


And of course they did none of these dreadful things, and everything was cleaned and put away safe 
as quick as lightning, while the hobbit was turning round and round in the middle of the kitchen trying 
to see what they were doing. Then they went back, and found Thorin with his feet on the fender 
smoking a pipe. He was blowing the most enormous smoke-rings, and wherever he told one to go, it 
went — up the chimney, or behind the clock on the mantelpiece, or under the table, or round and round 
the ceiling; but wherever it went it was not quick enough to escape Gandalf. Pop! he sent a smaller 



smoke-ring from his short clay-pipe straight through each one of Thorin’ s. Then Gandalf’s smoke-ring 
would go green and come back to hover over the wizard’s head. He had a cloud of them about him 
already, and in the dim light it made him look strange and sorcerous. Bilbo stood still and watched — 
he loved smoke-rings — and then he blushed to think how proud he had been yesterday morning of the 
smoke-rings he had sent up the wind over The Hill. 

“Now for some music!” said Thorin. “Bring out the instruments!” 

Kili and Fili rushed for their bags and brought back little fiddles; Dori, Nori, and Ori brought out 
flutes from somewhere inside their coats; Bombur produced a drum from the hall; Bifur and Bofur 
went out too, and came back with clarinets that they had left among the walking-sticks. Dwalin and 
Balin said: “Excuse me, I left mine in the porch!” “Just bring mine in with you!” said Thorin. They 
came back with viols as big as themselves, and with Thorin’ s harp wrapped in a green cloth. It was a 
beautiful golden harp, and when Thorin struck it the music began all at once, so sudden and sweet that 
Bilbo forgot everything else, and was swept away into dark lands under strange moons, far over The 
Water and very far from his hobbit-hole under The Hill. 

The dark came into the room from the little window that opened in the side of The Hill; the 
firelight flickered — it was April — and still they played on, while the shadow of Gandalf’s beard 
wagged against the wall. 

The dark filled all the room, and the fire died down, and the shadows were lost, and still they 
played on. And suddenly first one and then another began to sing as they played, deep-throated singing 
of the dwarves in the deep places of their ancient homes; and this is like a fragment of their song, if it 
can be like their song without their music. 


Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away ere break of day 
To seek the pale enchanted gold. 


The dwarves of yore made mighty spells, 
While hammers fell like ringing bells 
In places deep, where dark things sleep, 
In hollow halls beneath the fells. 


For ancient king and elvish lord 
There many a gleaming golden hoard 
They shaped and wrought, and light they caught 
To hide in gems on hilt of sword. 


On silver necklaces they strung 

The flowering stars, on crowns they hung 

The dragon-fire, in twisted wire 

They meshed the light of moon and sun. 



Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away, ere break of day, 
To claim our long-forgotten gold. 


Goblets they carved there for themselves 
And harps of gold; where no man delves 
There lay they long, and many a song 
Was sung unheard by men or elves. 


The pines were roaring on the height, 
The winds were moaning in the night. 
The fire was red, it flaming spread; 

The trees like torches blazed with light. 


The bells were ringing in the dale 
And men looked up with faces pale; 
The dragon’s ire more fierce than fire 
Laid low their towers and houses frail. 


The mountain smoked beneath the moon; 
The dwarves, they heard the tramp of doom. 
They fled their hall to dying fall 
Beneath his feet, beneath the moon. 


Far over the misty mountains grim 
To dungeons deep and caverns dim 
We must away, ere break of day, 

To win our harps and gold from him! 


As they sang the hobbit felt the love of beautiful things made by hands and by cunning and by 
magic moving through him, a fierce and a jealous love, the desire of the hearts of dwarves. Then 
something Tookish woke up inside him, and he wished to go and see the great mountains, and hear the 
pine-trees and the waterfalls, and explore the caves, and wear a sword instead of a walking-stick. He 
looked out of the window. The stars were out in a dark sky above the trees. He thought of the jewels of 
the dwarves shining in dark caverns. Suddenly in the wood beyond The Water a flame leapt up — 
probably somebody lighting a wood-fire — and he thought of plundering dragons settling on his quiet 
Hill and kindling it all to flames. He shuddered; and very quickly he was plain Mr. Baggins of Bag- 
End, Under-Hill, again. 

He got up trembling. He had less than half a mind to fetch the lamp, and more than half a mind to 
pretend to, and go and hide behind the beer-barrels in the cellar, and not come out again until all the 



dwarves had gone away. Suddenly he found that the music and the singing had stopped, and they were 
all looking at him with eyes shining in the dark. 

“Where are you going?” said Thorin, in a tone that seemed to show that he guessed both halves of 
the hobbit’s mind. 

“What about a little light?” said Bilbo apologetically. 

“We like the dark,” said all the dwarves. “Dark for dark business! There are many hours before 
dawn.” 

“Of course!” said Bilbo, and sat down in a hurry. He missed the stool and sat in the fender, 
knocking over the poker and shovel with a crash. 

“Hush!” said Gandalf. “Let Thorin speak!” And this is how Thorin began. 

“Gandalf, dwarves and Mr. Baggins! We are met together in the house of our friend and fellow 
conspirator, this most excellent and audacious hobbit — may the hair on his toes never fall out! all 
praise to his wine and ale! — ” He paused for breath and for a polite remark from the hobbit, but the 
compliments were quite lost on poor Bilbo Baggins, who was wagging his mouth in protest at being 
called audacious and worst of all fellow conspirator, though no noise came out, he was so flummoxed. 
So Thorin went on: 

“We are met to discuss our plans, our ways, means, policy and devices. We shall soon before the 
break of day start on our long journey, a journey from which some of us, or perhaps all of us (except 
our friend and counsellor, the ingenious wizard Gandalf) may never return. It is a solemn moment. 

Our object is, I take it, well known to us all. To the estimable Mr. Baggins, and perhaps to one or two 
of the younger dwarves (I think I should be right in naming Kili and Fili, for instance), the exact 
situation at the moment may require a little brief explanation — ” 

This was Thorin’ s style. He was an important dwarf. If he had been allowed, he would probably 
have gone on like this until he was out of breath, without telling any one there anything that was not 
known already. But he was rudely interrupted. Poor Bilbo couldn’t bear it any longer. At may never 
return he began to feel a shriek coming up inside, and very soon it burst out like the whistle of an 
engine coming out of a tunnel. All the dwarves sprang up, knocking over the table. Gandalf struck a 
blue light on the end of his magic staff, and in its firework glare the poor little hobbit could be seen 
kneeling on the hearth-rug, shaking like a jelly that was melting. Then he fell flat on the floor, and 
kept on calling out “struck by lightning, struck by lightning!” over and over again; and that was all 
they could get out of him for a long time. So they took him and laid him out of the way on the 
drawing-room sofa with a drink at his elbow, and they went back to their dark business. 

“Excitable little fellow,” said Gandalf, as they sat down again. “Gets funny queer fits, but he is one 
of the best, one of the best — as fierce as a dragon in a pinch.” 

If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch, you will realize that this was only poetical exaggeration 
applied to any hobbit, even to Old Took’s great-grand-uncle Bullroarer, who was so huge (for a 
hobbit) that he could ride a horse. He charged the ranks of the goblins of Mount Gram in the Battle of 
the Green Fields, and knocked their king Golfimbul’s head clean off with a wooden club. It sailed a 
hundred yards through the air and went down a rabbit-hole, and in this way the battle was won and the 
game of Golf invented at the same moment. 

In the meanwhile, however, Bullroarer’ s gentler descendant was reviving in the drawing-room. 
After a while and a drink he crept nervously to the door of the parlour. This is what he heard, Gloin 
speaking: “Humph!” (or some snort more or less like that). “Will he do, do you think? It is all very 
well for Gandalf to talk about this hobbit being fierce, but one shriek like that in a moment of 
excitement would be enough to wake the dragon and all his relatives, and kill the lot of us. I think it 



sounded more like fright than excitement! In fact, if it had not been for the sign on the door, I should 
have been sure we had come to the wrong house. As soon as I clapped eyes on the little fellow bobbing 
and puffing on the mat, I had my doubts. He looks more like a grocer than a burglar!” 

Then Mr. Baggins turned the handle and went in. The Took side had won. He suddenly felt he 
would go without bed and breakfast to be thought fierce. As for little fellow bobbing on the mat it 
almost made him really fierce. Many a time afterwards the Baggins part regretted what he did now, 
and he said to himself: “Bilbo, you were a fool; you walked right in and put your foot in it.” 

“Pardon me,” he said, “if I have overheard words that you were saying. I don’t pretend to 
understand what you are talking about, or your reference to burglars, but I think I am right in 
believing” (this is what he called being on his dignity) “that you think I am no good. I will show you. I 
have no signs on my door — it was painted a week ago — , and I am quite sure you have come to the 
wrong house. As soon as I saw your funny faces on the door-step, I had my doubts. But treat it as the 
right one. Tell me what you want done, and I will try it, if I have to walk from here to the East of East 
and fight the wild Were-worms in the Last Desert. I had a great-great-great-grand-uncle once, 
Bullroarer Took, and — ” 

“Yes, yes, but that was long ago,” said Gloin. “I was talking about you. And I assure you there is a 
mark on this door — the usual one in the trade, or used to be. Burglar wants a good job, plenty of 
Excitement and reasonable Reward, that’s how it is usually read. You can say Expert Treasure-hunter 
instead of Burglar if you like. Some of them do. It’s all the same to us. Gandalf told us that there was 
a man of the sort in these parts looking for a Job at once, and that he had arranged for a meeting here 
this Wednesday tea-time.” 

“Of course there is a mark,” said Gandalf. “I put it there myself. For very good reasons. You asked 
me to find the fourteenth man for your expedition, and I chose Mr. Baggins. Just let any one say I 
chose the wrong man or the wrong house, and you can stop at thirteen and have all the bad luck you 
like, or go back to digging coal.” 

He scowled so angrily at Gloin that the dwarf huddled back in his chair; and when Bilbo tried to 
open his mouth to ask a question, he turned and frowned at him and stuck out his bushy eyebrows, till 
Bilbo shut his mouth tight with a snap. “That’s right,” said Gandalf. “Let’s have no more argument. I 
have chosen Mr. Baggins and that ought to be enough for all of you. If I say he is a Burglar, a Burglar 
he is, or will be when the time comes. There is a lot more in him than you guess, and a deal more than 
he has any idea of himself. You may (possibly) all live to thank me yet. Now Bilbo, my boy, fetch the 
lamp, and let’s have a little light on this!” 

On the table in the light of a big lamp with a red shade he spread a piece of parchment rather like a 
map. 

“This was made by Thror, your grandfather, Thorin,” he said in answer to the dwarves’ excited 
questions. “It is a plan of the Mountain.” 

“I don’t see that this will help us much,” said Thorin disappointedly after a glance. “I remember 
the Mountain well enough and the lands about it. And I know where Mirkwood is, and the Withered 
Heath where the great dragons bred.” 

“There is a dragon marked in red on the Mountain,” said Balin, “but it will be easy enough to find 
him without that, if ever we arrive there.” 

“There is one point that you haven’t noticed,” said the wizard, “and that is the secret entrance. You 
see that rune on the West side, and the hand pointing to it from the other runes? That marks a hidden 
passage to the Lower Halls.” (Look at the map at the beginning of this book, and you will see there the 
runes.) 



“It may have been secret once,” said Thorin, “but how do we know that it is secret any longer? Old 
Smaug has lived there long enough now to find out anything there is to know about those caves.” 

“He may — but he can’t have used it for years and years.” 

“Why?” 

“Because it is too small. ‘ Five feet high the door and three may walk abreast ’ say the runes, but 
Smaug could not creep into a hole that size, not even when he was a young dragon, certainly not after 
devouring so many of the dwarves and men of Dale.” 

“It seems a great big hole to me,” squeaked Bilbo (who had no experience of dragons and only of 
hobbit-holes). He was getting excited and interested again, so that he forgot to keep his mouth shut. 

He loved maps, and in his hall there hung a large one of the Country Round with all his favourite 
walks marked on it in red ink. “How could such a large door be kept secret from everybody outside, 
apart from the dragon?” he asked. He was only a little hobbit you must remember. 

“In lots of ways,” said Gandalf. “But in what way this one has been hidden we don’t know without 
going to see. From what it says on the map I should guess there is a closed door which has been made 
to look exactly like the side of the Mountain. That is the usual dwarves’ method — I think that is right, 
isn’t it?” 

“Quite right,” said Thorin. 

“Also,” went on Gandalf, “I forgot to mention that with the map went a key, a small and curious 
key. Here it is!” he said, and handed to Thorin a key with a long barrel and intricate wards, made of 
silver. “Keep it safe!” 

“Indeed I will,” said Thorin, and he fastened it upon a fine chain that hung about his neck and 
under his jacket. “Now things begin to look more hopeful. This news alters them much for the better. 
So far we have had no clear idea what to do. We thought of going East, as quiet and careful as we 
could, as far as the Long Lake. After that the trouble would begin — .” 

“A long time before that, if I know anything about the roads East,” interrupted Gandalf. 

“We might go from there up along the River Running,” went on Thorin taking no notice, “and so to 
the ruins of Dale — the old town in the valley there, under the shadow of the Mountain. But we none of 
us liked the idea of the Front Gate. The river runs right out of it through the great cliff at the South of 
the Mountain, and out of it comes the dragon too — far too often, unless he has changed his habits.” 

“That would be no good,” said the wizard, “not without a mighty Warrior, even a Hero. I tried to 
find one; but warriors are busy fighting one another in distant lands, and in this neighbourhood heroes 
are scarce, or simply not to be found. Swords in these parts are mostly blunt, and axes are used for 
trees, and shields as cradles or dish-covers; and dragons are comfortably far-off (and therefore 
legendary). That is why I settled on burglary — especially when I remembered the existence of a Side- 
door. And here is our little Bilbo Baggins, the burglar, the chosen and selected burglar. So now let’s 
get on and make some plans.” 

“Very well then,” said Thorin, “supposing the burglar-expert gives us some ideas or suggestions.” 
He turned with mock-politeness to Bilbo. 

“First I should like to know a bit more about things,” said he, feeling all confused and a bit shaky 
inside, but so far still Tookishly determined to go on with things. “I mean about the gold and the 
dragon, and all that, and how it got there, and who it belongs to, and so on and further.” 

“Bless me!” said Thorin, “haven’t you got a map? and didn’t you hear our song? and haven’t we 
been talking about all this for hours?” 

“All the same, I should like it all plain and clear,” said he obstinately, putting on his business 
manner (usually reserved for people who tried to borrow money off him), and doing his best to appear 


wise and prudent and professional and live up to Gandalf’s recommendation. “Also I should like to 
know about risks, out-of-pocket expenses, time required and remuneration, and so forth” — by which 
he meant: “What am I going to get out of it? and am I going to come back alive?” 

“O very well,” said Thorin. “Long ago in my grandfather Thror’s time our family was driven out of 
the far North, and came back with all their wealth and their tools to this Mountain on the map. It had 
been discovered by my far ancestor, Thrain the Old, but now they mined and they tunnelled and they 
made huger halls and greater workshops — and in addition I believe they found a good deal of gold and 
a great many jewels too. Anyway they grew immensely rich and famous, and my grandfather was King 
under the Mountain again, and treated with great reverence by the mortal men, who lived to the South, 
and were gradually spreading up the Running River as far as the valley overshadowed by the 
Mountain. They built the merry town of Dale there in those days. Kings used to send for our smiths, 
and reward even the least skillful most richly. Fathers would beg us to take their sons as apprentices, 
and pay us handsomely, especially in food-supplies, which we never bothered to grow or find for 
ourselves. Altogether those were good days for us, and the poorest of us had money to spend and to 
lend, and leisure to make beautiful things just for the fun of it, not to speak of the most marvellous 
and magical toys, the like of which is not to be found in the world now-a-days. So my grandfather’s 
halls became full of armour and jewels and carvings and cups, and the toy market of Dale was the 
wonder of the North. 

“Undoubtedly that was what brought the dragon. Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know, from 
men and elves and dwarves, wherever they can find them; and they guard their plunder as long as they 
live (which is practically for ever, unless they are killed), and never enjoy a brass ring of it. Indeed 
they hardly know a good bit of work from a bad, though they usually have a good notion of the current 
market value; and they can’t make a thing for themselves, not even mend a little loose scale of their 
armour. There were lots of dragons in the North in those days, and gold was probably getting scarce up 
there, with the dwarves flying south or getting killed, and all the general waste and destruction that 
dragons make going from bad to worse. There was a most specially greedy, strong and wicked worm 
called Smaug. One day he flew up into the air and came south. The first we heard of it was a noise like 
a hurricane coming from the North, and the pine-trees on the Mountain creaking and cracking in the 
wind. Some of the dwarves who happened to be outside (I was one luckily — a fine adventurous lad in 
those days, always wandering about, and it saved my life that day) — well, from a good way off we saw 
the dragon settle on our mountain in a spout of flame. Then he came down the slopes and when he 
reached the woods they all went up in fire. By that time all the bells were ringing in Dale and the 
warriors were arming. The dwarves rushed out of their great gate; but there was the dragon waiting for 
them. None escaped that way. The river rushed up in steam and a fog fell on Dale, and in the fog the 
dragon came on them and destroyed most of the warriors — the usual unhappy story, it was only too 
common in those days. Then he went back and crept in through the Front Gate and routed out all the 
halls, and lanes, and tunnels, alleys, cellars, mansions and passages. After that there were no dwarves 
left alive inside, and he took all their wealth for himself. Probably, for that is the dragons’ way, he has 
piled it all up in a great heap far inside, and sleeps on it for a bed. Later he used to crawl out of the 
great gate and come by night to Dale, and carry away people, especially maidens, to eat, until Dale 
was ruined, and all the people dead or gone. What goes on there now I don’t know for certain, but I 
don’t suppose any one lives nearer to the Mountain than the far edge of the Long Lake now-a-days. 

“The few of us that were well outside sat and wept in hiding, and cursed Smaug; and there we were 
unexpectedly joined by my father and my grandfather with singed beards. They looked very grim but 
they said very little. When I asked how they had got away, they told me to hold my tongue, and said 



that one day in the proper time I should know. After that we went away, and we have had to earn our 
livings as best we could up and down the lands, often enough sinking as low as blacksmith-work or 
even coalmining. But we have never forgotten our stolen treasure. And even now, when I will allow 
we have a good bit laid by and are not so badly off” — here Thorin stroked the gold chain round his 
neck — “we still mean to get it back, and to bring our curses home to Smaug — if we can. 

“I have often wondered about my father’s and my grandfather’s escape. I see now they must have 
had a private Side-door which only they knew about. But apparently they made a map, and I should 
like to know how Gandalf got hold of it, and why it did not come down to me, the rightful heir.” 

“I did not ‘get hold of it,’ I was given it,” said the wizard. “Your grandfather Thror was killed, you 
remember, in the mines of Moria by Azog the Goblin .” 

“Curse his name, yes,” said Thorin. 

“And Thrain your father went away on the twenty-first of April, a hundred years ago last Thursday, 
and has never been seen by you since-” 

“True, true,” said Thorin. 

“Well, your father gave me this to give to you; and if I have chosen my own time and way for 
handing it over, you can hardly blame me, considering the trouble I had to find you. Your father could 
not remember his own name when he gave me the paper, and he never told me yours; so on the whole I 
think I ought to be praised and thanked! Here it is,” said he handing the map to Thorin. 

“I don’t understand,” said Thorin, and Bilbo felt he would have liked to say the same. The 
explanation did not seem to explain. 

“Your grandfather,” said the wizard slowly and grimly, “gave the map to his son for safety before 
he went to the mines of Moria. Your father went away to try his luck with the map after your 
grandfather was killed; and lots of adventures of a most unpleasant sort he had, but he never got near 
the Mountain. How he got there I don’t know, but I found him a prisoner in the dungeons of the 
Necromancer.” 

“Whatever were you doing there?” asked Thorin with a shudder, and all the dwarves shivered. 

“Never you mind. I was finding things out, as usual; and a nasty dangerous business it was. Even I, 
Gandalf, only just escaped. I tried to save your father, but it was too late. He was witless and 
wandering, and had forgotten almost everything except the map and the key.” 

“We have long ago paid the goblins of Moria,” said Thorin; “we must give a thought to the 
Necromancer.” 

“Don’t be absurd! He is an enemy far beyond the powers of all the dwarves put together, if they 
could all be collected again from the four corners of the world. The one thing your father wished was 
for his son to read the map and use the key. The dragon and the Mountain are more than big enough 
tasks for you!” 

“Hear, hear!” said Bilbo, and accidentally said it aloud. 

“Hear what?” they all said turning suddenly towards him, and he was so flustered that he answered 
“Hear what I have got to say!” 

“What’s that?” they asked. 

“Well, I should say that you ought to go East and have a look round. After all there is the Side- 
door, and dragons must sleep sometimes, I suppose. If you sit on the door-step long enough, I daresay 
you will think of something. And well, don’t you know, I think we have talked long enough for one 
night, if you see what I mean. What about bed, and an early start, and all that? I will give you a good 
breakfast before you go.” 

“Before we go, I suppose you mean,” said Thorin. “Aren’t you the burglar? And isn’t sitting on the 


door-step your job, not to speak of getting inside the door? But I agree about bed and breakfast. I like 
six eggs with my ham, when starting on a journey: fried not poached, and mind you don’t break ’em.” 

After all the others had ordered their breakfasts without so much as a please (which annoyed Bilbo 
very much), they all got up. The hobbit had to find room for them all, and filled all his spare-rooms 
and made beds on chairs and sofas, before he got them all stowed and went to his own little bed very 
tired and not altogether happy. One thing he did make his mind up about was not to bother to get up 
very early and cook everybody else’s wretched breakfast. The Tookishness was wearing off, and he 
was not now quite so sure that he was going on any journey in the morning. 

As he lay in bed he could hear Thorin still humming to himself in the best bedroom next to him: 

Far over the misty mountains cold 
To dungeons deep and caverns old 
We must away, ere break of day, 

To find our long-forgotten gold. 

Bilbo went to sleep with that in his ears, and it gave him very uncomfortable dreams. It was long 
after the break of day, when he woke up. 



Chapter II 


ROAST MUTTON 


Up jumped Bilbo, and putting on his dressing-gown went into the dining-room. There he saw nobody, 
but all the signs of a large and hurried breakfast. There was a fearful mess in the room, and piles of 
unwashed crocks in the kitchen. Nearly every pot and pan he possessed seemed to have been used. The 
washing-up was so dismally real that Bilbo was forced to believe the party of the night before had not 
been part of his bad dreams, as he had rather hoped. Indeed he was really relieved after all to think 
that they had all gone without him, and without bothering to wake him up (“but with never a thank- 
you” he thought); and yet in a way he could not help feeling just a trifle disappointed. The feeling 
surprised him. 

“Don’t be a fool, Bilbo Baggins!” he said to himself, “thinking of dragons and all that outlandish 
nonsense at your age!” So he put on an apron, lit fires, boiled water, and washed up. Then he had a 
nice little breakfast in the kitchen before turning out the dining-room. By that time the sun was 
shining; and the front door was open, letting in a warm spring breeze. Bilbo began to whistle loudly 
and to forget about the night before. In fact he was just sitting down to a nice little second breakfast in 
the dining-room by the open window, when in walked Gandalf . 

“My dear fellow,” said he, “whenever are you going to come? What about an early start ? — and 
here you are having breakfast, or whatever you call it, at half past ten! They left you the message, 
because they could not wait.” 

“What message?” said poor Mr. Baggins all in a fluster. 

“Great Elephants!” said Gandalf, “you are not at all yourself this morning — you have never dusted 
the mantelpiece!” 

“What’s that got to do with it? I have had enough to do with washing up for fourteen!” 

“If you had dusted the mantelpiece, you would have found this just under the clock,” said Gandalf, 
handing Bilbo a note (written, of course, on his own note-paper). 

This is what he read: 


“Thorin and Company to Burglar Bilbo greeting! For your hospitality our sincerest thanks, and for 
your offer of professional assistance our grateful acceptance. Terms: cash on delivery, up to and not 
exceeding one fourteenth of total profits (if any); all travelling expenses guaranteed in any event; 
funeral expenses to be defrayed by us or our representatives, if occasion arises and the matter is not 
otherwise arranged for. 

“Thinking it unnecessary to disturb your esteemed repose, we have proceeded in advance to make 
requisite preparations, and shall await your respected person at the Green Dragon Inn, Bywater, at 11 
a.m. sharp. Trusting that you will be punctual, 

“ We have the honour to remain 
“ Yours deeply 
“ Thorin & Co.” 


“That leaves you just ten minutes. You will have to run,” said Gandalf. 

“But — said Bilbo. 

“No time for it,” said the wizard. 

“But — ,” said Bilbo again. 

“No time for that either! Off you go!” 

To the end of his days Bilbo could never remember how he found himself outside, without a hat, a 
walking-stick or any money, or anything that he usually took when he went out; leaving his second 
breakfast half-finished and quite unwashed-up, pushing his keys into Gandalf’ s hands, and running as 
fast as his furry feet could carry him down the lane, past the great Mill, across The Water, and then on 
for a mile or more. 

Very puffed he was, when he got to Bywater just on the stroke of eleven, and found he had come 
without a pocket-handkerchief! 

“Bravo!” said Balin who was standing at the inn door looking out for him. 

Just then all the others came round the corner of the road from the village. They were on ponies, 
and each pony was slung about with all kinds of baggages, packages, parcels, and paraphernalia. There 
was a very small pony, apparently for Bilbo. 

“Up you two get, and off we go!” said Thorin. 

“I’m awfully sorry,” said Bilbo, “but I have come without my hat, and I have left my pocket- 
handkerchief behind, and I haven’t got any money. I didn’t get your note until after 10.45 to be 
precise.” 

“Don’t be precise,” said Dwalin, “and don’t worry! You will have to manage without pocket- 
handkerchiefs, and a good many other things, before you get to the journey’s end. As for a hat, I have 
got a spare hood and cloak in my luggage.” 

That’s how they all came to start, jogging off from the inn one fine morning just before May, on 
laden ponies; and Bilbo was wearing a dark-green hood (a little weather-stained) and a dark-green 
cloak borrowed from Dwalin. They were too large for him, and he looked rather comic. What his 
father Bungo would have thought of him, I daren’t think. His only comfort was he couldn’t be 
mistaken for a dwarf, as he had no beard. 

They had not been riding very long, when up came Gandalf very splendid on a white horse. He had 
brought a lot of pocket-handkerchiefs, and Bilbo’s pipe and tobacco. So after that the party went along 
very merrily, and they told stories or sang songs as they rode forward all day, except of course when 
they stopped for meals. These didn’t come quite as often as Bilbo would have liked them, but still he 
began to feel that adventures were not so bad after all. 

At first they had passed through hobbit-lands, a wide respectable country inhabited by decent folk, 
with good roads, an inn or two, and now and then a dwarf or a farmer ambling by on business. Then 
they came to lands where people spoke strangely, and sang songs Bilbo had never heard before. Now 
they had gone on far into the Lone-lands, where there were no people left, no inns, and the roads grew 
steadily worse. Not far ahead were dreary hills, rising higher and higher, dark with trees. On some of 
them were old castles with an evil look, as if they had been built by wicked people. Everything seemed 
gloomy, for the weather that day had taken a nasty turn. Mostly it had been as good as May can be, can 
be, even in merry tales, but now it was cold and wet. In the Lone-lands they had been obliged to camp 
when they could, but at least it had been dry. 

“To think it will soon be June!” grumbled Bilbo, as he splashed along behind the others in a very 
muddy track. It was after tea-time; it was pouring with rain, and had been all day; his hood was 
dripping into his eyes, his cloak was full of water; the pony was tired and stumbled on stones; the 



others were too grumpy to talk. “And I’m sure the rain has got into the dry clothes and into the food- 
bags,” thought Bilbo. “Bother burgling and everything to do with it! I wish I was at home in my nice 
hole by the fire, with the kettle just beginning to sing!” It was not the last time that he wished that! 

Still the dwarves jogged on, never turning round or taking any notice of the hobbit. Somewhere 
behind the grey clouds the sun must have gone down, for it began to get dark as they went down into a 
deep valley with a river at the bottom. Wind got up, and willows along its banks bent and sighed. 
Fortunately the road went over an ancient stone bridge, for the river, swollen with the rains, came 
rushing down from the hills and mountains in the north. 

It was nearly night when they had crossed over. The wind broke up the grey clouds, and a 
wandering moon appeared above the hills between the flying rags. Then they stopped, and Thorin 
muttered something about supper, “and where shall we get a dry patch to sleep on?” Not until then did 
they notice that Gandalf was missing. So far he had come all the way with them, never saying if he 
was in the adventure or merely keeping them company for a while. He had eaten most, talked most, 
and laughed most. But now he simply was not there at all! 


“Just when a wizard would have been most useful, too,” groaned Dori and Nori (who shared the 
hobbit’s views about regular meals, plenty and often). 

They decided in the end that they would have to camp where they were. They moved to a clump of 
trees, and though it was drier under them, the wind shook the rain off the leaves, and the drip, drip, 
was most annoying. Also the mischief seemed to have got into the fire. Dwarves can make a fire 
almost anywhere out of almost anything, wind or no wind; but they could not do it that night, not even 
Oin and Gloin, who were specially good at it. 

Then one of the ponies took fright at nothing and bolted. He got into the river before they could 
catch him; and before they could get him out again, Fili and Kili were nearly drowned, and all the 
baggage that he carried was washed away off him. Of course it was mostly food, and there was mighty 
little left for supper, and less for breakfast. 

There they all sat glum and wet and muttering, while Oin and Gloin went on trying to light the fire, 
and quarrelling about it. Bilbo was sadly reflecting that adventures are not all pony-rides in May- 
sunshine, when Balin, who was always their look-out man, said: “There’s a light over there!” There 
was a hill some way off with trees on it, pretty thick in parts. Out of the dark mass of the trees they 
could now see a light shining, a reddish comfortable-looking light, as it might be a fire or torches 
twinkling. 

When they had looked at it for some while, they fell to arguing. Some said “no” and some said 
“yes”. Some said they could but go and see, and anything was better than little supper, less breakfast, 
and wet clothes all the night. 

Others said: “These parts are none too well known, and are too near the mountains. Travellers 
seldom come this way now. The old maps are no use: things have changed for the worse and the road 
is unguarded. They have seldom even heard of the king round here, and the less inquisitive you are as 
you go along, the less trouble you are likely to find.” Some said: “After all there are fourteen of us.” 
Others said: “Where has Gandalf got to?” This remark was repeated by everybody. Then the rain 
began to pour down worse than ever, and Oin and Gloin began to fight. 

That settled it. “After all we have got a burglar with us,” they said; and so they made off, leading 
their ponies (with all due and proper caution) in the direction of the light. They came to the hill and 



were soon in the wood. Up the hill they went; but there was no proper path to be seen, such as might 
lead to a house or a farm; and do what they could they made a deal of rustling and crackling and 
creaking (and a good deal of grumbling and dratting), as they went through the trees in the pitch dark. 

Suddenly the red light shone out very bright through the tree-trunks not far ahead. 

“Now it is the burglar’s turn,” they said, meaning Bilbo. “You must go on and find out all about 
that light, and what it is for, and if all is perfectly safe and canny,” said Thorin to the hobbit. “Now 
scuttle off, and come back quick, if all is well. If not, come back if you can! If you can’t, hoot twice 
like a barn-owl and once like a screech-owl, and we will do what we can.” 

Off Bilbo had to go, before he could explain that he could not hoot even once like any kind of owl 
any more than fly like a bat. But at any rate hobbits can move quietly in woods, absolutely quietly. 
They take a pride in it, and Bilbo had sniffed more than once at what he called “all this dwarvish 
racket,” as they went along, though I don’t suppose you or I would have noticed anything at all on a 
windy night, not if the whole cavalcade had passed two feet off. As for Bilbo walking primly towards 
the red light, I don’t suppose even a weasel would have stirred a whisker at it. So, naturally, he got 
right up to the fire — for fire it was — without disturbing anyone. And this is what he saw. 

Three very large persons sitting round a very large fire of beech-logs. They were toasting mutton 
on long spits of wood, and licking the gravy off their fingers. There was a fine toothsome smell. Also 
there was a barrel of good drink at hand, and they were drinking out of jugs. But they were trolls. 
Obviously trolls. Even Bilbo, in spite of his sheltered life, could see that: from the great heavy faces 
of them, and their size, and the shape of their legs, not to mention their language, which was not 
drawing-room fashion at all, at all. 

“Mutton yesterday, mutton today, and blimey, if it don’t look like mutton again tomorrer,” said 
one of the trolls. 

“Never a blinking bit of manflesh have we had for long enough,” said a second. “What the ’ell 
William was a-thinkin’ of to bring us into these parts at all, beats me — and the drink runnin’ short, 
what’s more,” he said jogging the elbow of William, who was taking a pull at his jug. 

William choked. “Shut yer mouth!” he said as soon as he could. “Yer can’t expect folk to stop here 
for ever just to be et by you and Bert. You’ve et a village and a half between yer, since we come down 
from the mountains. How much more d’yer want? And time’s been up our way, when yer’d have said 
‘thank yer Bill’ for a nice bit o’ fat valley mutton like what this is.” He took a big bite off a sheep’s 
leg he was roasting, and wiped his lips on his sleeve. 

Yes, I am afraid trolls do behave like that, even those with only one head each. After hearing all 
this Bilbo ought to have done something at once. Either he should have gone back quietly and warned 
his friends that there were three fair-sized trolls at hand in a nasty mood, quite likely to try roasted 
dwarf, or even pony, for a change; or else he should have done a bit of good quick burgling. A really 
first-class and legendary burglar would at this point have picked the trolls’ pockets — it is nearly 
always worth while, if you can manage it — , pinched the very mutton off the spits, purloined the beer, 
and walked off without their noticing him. Others more practical but with less professional pride 
would perhaps have stuck a dagger into each of them before they observed it. Then the night could 
have been spent cheerily. 

Bilbo knew it. He had read of a good many things he had never seen or done. He was very much 
alarmed, as well as disgusted; he wished himself a hundred miles away, and yet — and yet somehow he 
could not go straight back to Thorin and Company emptyhanded. So he stood and hesitated in the 
shadows. Of the various burglarious proceedings he had heard of picking the trolls’ pockets seemed 
the least difficult, so at last he crept behind a tree just behind William. 



Bert and Tom went off to the barrel. William was having another drink. Then Bilbo plucked up 
courage and put his little hand in William’s enormous pocket. There was a purse in it, as big as a bag 
to Bilbo. “Ha!” thought he, warming to his new work as he lifted it carefully out, “this is a beginning!” 
It was! Trolls’ purses are the mischief, and this was no exception. “’Ere, ’oo are you?” it squeaked, 
as it left the pocket; and William turned round at once and grabbed Bilbo by the neck, before he could 
duck behind the tree. 

“Blimey, Bert, look what I’ve copped!” said William. 

“What is it?” said the others coming up. “Lumme, if I knows! What are yer?” 

“Bilbo Baggins, a bur — a hobbit,” said poor Bilbo, shaking all over, and wondering how to make 
owl-noises before they throttled him. 

“A burrahobbit?” said they a bit startled. Trolls are slow in the uptake, and mighty suspicious about 
anything new to them. 

“What’s a burrahobbit got to do with my pocket, anyways?” said William. 

“And can yer cook ’em?” said Tom. 

“Yer can try,” said Bert, picking up a skewer. 

“He wouldn’t make above a mouthful,” said William, who had already had a fine supper, “not 
when he was skinned and boned.” 

“P’raps there are more like him round about, and we might make a pie,” said Bert. “Here you, are 
there any more of your sort a-sneakin’ in these here woods, yer nassty little rabbit,” said he looking at 
the hobbit’s furry feet; and he picked him up by the toes and shook him. 

“Yes, lots,” said Bilbo, before he remembered not to give his friends away. “No none at all, not 
one,” he said immediately afterwards. 

“What d’yer mean?” said Bert, holding him right way up, by the hair this time. 

“What I say,” said Bilbo gasping. “And please don’t cook me, kind sirs! I am a good cook myself, 
and cook better than I cook, if you see what I mean. I’ll cook beautifully for you, a perfectly beautiful 
breakfast for you, if only you won’t have me for supper.” 

“Poor little blighter,” said William. He had already had as much supper as he could hold; also he 
had had lots of beer. “Poor little blighter! Let him go!” 

“Not till he says what he means by lots and none at all,” said Bert. “I don’t want to have me throat 
cut in me sleep! Hold his toes in the fire, till he talks!” 

“I won’t have it,” said William. “I caught him anyway.” 

“You’re a fat fool, William,” said Bert, “as I’ve said afore this evening.” 

“And you’re a lout!” 

“And I won’t take that from you, Bill Huggins,” says Bert, and puts his fist in William’s eye. 

Then there was a gorgeous row. Bilbo had just enough wits left, when Bert dropped him on the 
ground, to scramble out of the way of their feet, before they were fighting like dogs, and calling one 
another all sorts of perfectly true and applicable names in very loud voices. Soon they were locked in 
one another’s arms, and rolling nearly into the fire kicking and thumping, while Tom whacked at them 
both with a branch to bring them to their senses — and that of course only made them madder than 
ever. 

That would have been the time for Bilbo to have left. But his poor little feet had been very 
squashed in Bert’s big paw, and he had no breath in his body, and his head was going round; so there 
he lay for a while panting, just outside the circle of firelight. 

Right in the middle of the fight up came Balin. The dwarves had heard noises from a distance, and 
after waiting for some time for Bilbo to come back, or to hoot like an owl, they started off one by one 



to creep towards the light as quietly as they could. No sooner did Tom see Balin come into the light 
than he gave an awful howl. Trolls simply detest the very sight of dwarves (uncooked). Bert and Bill 
stopped fighting immediately, and “a sack, Tom, quick!” they said. Before Balin, who was wondering 
where in all this commotion Bilbo was, knew what was happening, a sack was over his head, and he 
was down. 

“There’s more to come yet,” said Tom, “or I’m mighty mistook. Lots and none at all, it is,” said he. 
“No burrahobbits, but lots of these here dwarves. That’s about the shape of it!” 

“I reckon you’re right,” said Bert, “and we’d best get out of the light.” 

And so they did. With sacks in their hands, that they used for carrying off mutton and other 
plunder, they waited in the shadows. As each dwarf came up and looked at the fire, and the spilled 
jugs, and the gnawed mutton, in surprise, pop! went a nasty smelly sack over his head, and he was 
down. Soon Dwalin lay by Balin, and Fili and Kili together, and Dori and Nori and Ori all in a heap, 
and Oin and Gloin and Bifur and Bofur and Bombur piled uncomfortably near the fire. 

“That’ll teach ’em,” said Tom; for Bifur and Bombur had given a lot of trouble, and fought like 
mad, as dwarves will when cornered. 

Thorin came last — and he was not caught unawares. He came expecting mischief, and didn’t need 
to see his friends’ legs sticking out of sacks to tell him that things were not all well. He stood outside 
in the shadows some way off, and said: “What’s all this trouble? Who has been knocking my people 
about?” 

“It’s trolls!” said Bilbo from behind a tree. They had forgotten all about him. “They’re hiding in 
the bushes with sacks,” said he. 

“O! are they?” said Thorin, and he jumped forward to the fire, before they could leap on him. He 
caught up a big branch all on fire at one end; and Bert got that end in his eye before he could step 
aside. That put him out of the battle for a bit. Bilbo did his best. He caught hold of Tom’s leg — as well 
as he could, it was thick as a young tree-trunk — but he was sent spinning up into the top of some 
bushes, when Tom kicked the sparks up in Thorin’ s face. 




The Trolls 

Tom got the branch in his teeth for that, and lost one of the front ones. It made him howl, I can tell 



you. But just at that moment William came up behind and popped a sack right over Thorin’s head and 
down to his toes. And so the fight ended. A nice pickle they were all in now: all neatly tied up in 
sacks, with three angry trolls (and two with burns and bashes to remember) sitting by them, arguing 
whether they should roast them slowly, or mince them fine and boil them, or just sit on them one by 
one and squash them into jelly; and Bilbo up in a bush, with his clothes and his skin torn, not daring to 
move for fear they should hear him. 


It was just then that Gandalf came back. But no one saw him. The trolls had just decided to roast the 
dwarves now and eat them later — that was Bert’s idea, and after a lot of argument they had all agreed 
to it. 

“No good roasting ’em now, it’d take all night,” said a voice. Bert thought it was William’s. 

“Don’t start the argument all over again, Bill,” he said, “or it will take all night.” 

“Who’s a-arguing?” said William, who thought it was Bert that had spoken. 

“You are,” said Bert. 

“You’re a liar,” said William; and so the argument began all over again. In the end they decided to 
mince them fine and boil them. So they got a great black pot, and they took out their knives. 

“No good boiling ’em! We ain’t got no water, and it’s a long way to the well and all,” said a voice. 
Bert and William thought it was Tom’s. 

“Shut up!” said they, “or we’ll never have done. And yer can fetch the water yerself, if yer say any 
more.” 

“Shut up yerself!” said Tom, who thought it was William’s voice. “Who’s arguing but you, I’d like 
to know.” 

“You’re a booby,” said William. 

“Booby yerself!” said Tom. 

And so the argument began all over again, and went on hotter than ever, until at last they decided to 
sit on the sacks one by one and squash them, and boil them next time. 

“Who shall we sit on first?” said the voice. 

“Better sit on the last fellow first,” said Bert, whose eye had been damaged by Thorin. He thought 
Tom was talking. 

“Don’t talk to yerself!” said Tom. “But if you wants to sit on the last one, sit on him. Which is he?” 

“The one with the yellow stockings,” said Bert. 

“Nonsense, the one with the grey stockings,” said a voice like William’s. 

“I made sure it was yellow,” said Bert. 

“Yellow it was,” said William. 

“Then what did yer say it was grey for?” said Bert. 

“I never did. Tom said it.” 

“That I never did!” said Tom. “It was you.” 

“Two to one, so shut yer mouth!” said Bert. 

“Who are you a-talkin’ to?” said William. 

“Now stop it!” said Tom and Bert together. “The night’s gettin’ on, and dawn comes early. Let’s 
get on with it!” 

“Dawn take you all, and be stone to you!” said a voice that sounded like William’s. But it wasn’t. 
For just at that moment the light came over the hill, and there was a mighty twitter in the branches. 



William never spoke for he stood turned to stone as he stooped; and Bert and Tom were stuck like 
rocks as they looked at him. And there they stand to this day, all alone, unless the birds perch on them; 
for trolls, as you probably know, must be underground before dawn, or they go back to the stuff of the 
mountains they are made of, and never move again. That is what had happened to Bert and Tom and 
William. 

“Excellent!” said Gandalf, as he stepped from behind a tree, and helped Bilbo to climb down out of 
a thorn-bush. Then Bilbo understood. It was the wizard’s voice that had kept the trolls bickering and 
quarrelling, until the light came and made an end of them. 

The next thing was to untie the sacks and let out the dwarves. They were nearly suffocated, and 
very annoyed: they had not at all enjoyed lying there listening to the trolls making plans for roasting 
them and squashing them and mincing them. They had to hear Bilbo’s account of what had happened 
to him twice over, before they were satisfied. 

“Silly time to go practising pinching and pocket-picking,” said Bombur, “when what we wanted 
was fire and food!” 

“And that’s just what you wouldn’t have got of those fellows without a struggle, in any case,” said 
Gandalf. “Anyhow you are wasting time now. Don’t you realize that the trolls must have a cave or a 
hole dug somewhere near to hide from the sun in? We must look into it!” 

They searched about, and soon found the marks of trolls’ stony boots going away through the trees. 
They followed the tracks up the hill, until hidden by bushes they came on a big door of stone leading 
to a cave. But they could not open it, not though they all pushed while Gandalf tried various 
incantations. 

“Would this be any good?” asked Bilbo, when they were getting tired and angry. “I found it on the 
ground where the trolls had their fight.” He held out a largish key, though no doubt William had 
thought it very small and secret. It must have fallen out of his pocket, very luckily, before he was 
turned to stone. 

“Why on earth didn’t you mention it before?” they cried. Gandalf grabbed it and fitted it into the 
keyhole. Then the stone door swung back with one big push, and they all went inside. There were 
bones on the floor and a nasty smell was in the air; but there was a good deal of food jumbled 
carelessly on shelves and on the ground, among an untidy litter of plunder, of all sorts from brass 
buttons to pots full of gold coins standing in a corner. There were lots of clothes, too, hanging on the 
walls — too small for trolls, I am afraid they belonged to victims — and among them were several 
swords of various makes, shapes, and sizes. Two caught their eyes particularly, because of their 
beautiful scabbards and jewelled hilts. 

Gandalf and Thorin each took one of these; and Bilbo took a knife in a leather sheath. It would 
have made only a tiny pocket-knife for a troll, but it was as good as a short sword for the hobbit. 

“These look like good blades,” said the wizard, half drawing them and looking at them curiously. 
“They were not made by any troll, nor by any smith among men in these parts and days; but when we 
can read the runes on them, we shall know more about them.” 

“Let’s get out of this horrible smell!” said Fili. So they carried out the pots of coins, and such food 
as was untouched and looked fit to eat, also one barrel of ale which was still full. By that time they felt 
like breakfast, and being very hungry they did not turn their noses up at what they had got from the 
trolls’ larder. Their own provisions were very scanty. Now they had bread and cheese, and plenty of 
ale, and bacon to toast in the embers of the fire. 

After that they slept, for their night had been disturbed; and they did nothing more till the 
afternoon. Then they brought up their ponies, and carried away the pots of gold, and buried them very 



secretly not far from the track by the river, putting a great many spells over them, just in case they 
ever had the chance to come back and recover them. When that was done, they all mounted once more, 
and jogged along again on the path towards the East. 

“Where did you go to, if I may ask?” said Thorin to Gandalf as they rode along. 

“To look ahead,” said he. 

“And what brought you back in the nick of time?” “Looking behind,” said he. 

“Exactly!” said Thorin; “but could you be more plain?” 

“I went on to spy out our road. It will soon become dangerous and difficult. Also I was anxious 
about replenishing our small stock of provisions. I had not gone very far, however, when I met a 
couple of friends of mine from Rivendell.” 

“Where’s that?” asked Bilbo. 

“Don’t interrupt!” said Gandalf. “You will get there in a few days now, if we’re lucky, and find out 
all about it. As I was saying I met two of Elrond’s people. They were hurrying along for fear of the 
trolls. It was they who told me that three of them had come down from the mountains and settled in 
the woods not far from the road: they had frightened everyone away from the district, and they 
waylaid strangers. 

“I immediately had a feeling that I was wanted back. Looking behind I saw a fire in the distance 
and made for it. So now you know. Please be more careful, next time, or we shall never get 
anywhere ! ” 

“Thank you!” said Thorin. 



Chapter III 


A SHORT REST 


They did not sing or tell stories that day, even though the weather improved; nor the next day, nor the 
day after. They had begun to feel that danger was not far away on either side. They camped under the 
stars, and their horses had more to eat than they had; for there was plenty of grass, but there was not 
much in their bags, even with what they had got from the trolls. One morning they forded a river at a 
wide shallow place full of the noise of stones and foam. The far bank was steep and slippery. When 
they got to the top of it, leading their ponies, they saw that the great mountains had marched down 
very near to them. Already they seemed only a day’s easy journey from the feet of the nearest. Dark 
and drear it looked, though there were patches of sunlight on its brown sides, and behind its shoulders 
the tips of snow-peaks gleamed. 

“Is that The Mountain?” asked Bilbo in a solemn voice, looking at it with round eyes. He had never 
seen a thing that looked so big before. 

“Of course not!” said Balin. “That is only the beginning of the Misty Mountains, and we have got 
to get through, or over, or under those somehow, before we can come into Wilderland beyond. And it 
is a deal of a way even from the other side of them to the Lonely Mountain in the East where Smaug 
lies on our treasure.” 

“O!” said Bilbo, and just at that moment he felt more tired than he ever remembered feeling 
before. He was thinking once again of his comfortable chair before the fire in his favourite sitting- 
room in his hobbit-hole, and of the kettle singing. Not for the last time! 


Now Gandalf led the way. “We must not miss the road, or we shall be done for,” he said. “We need 
food, for one thing, and rest in reasonable safety — also it is very necessary to tackle the Misty 
Mountains by the proper path, or else you will get lost in them, and have to come back and start at the 
beginning again (if you ever get back at all).” 

They asked him where he was making for, and he answered: “You are come to the very edge of the 
Wild, as some of you may know. Hidden somewhere ahead of us is the fair valley of Rivendell where 
Elrond lives in the Last Homely House. I sent a message by my friends, and we are expected.” 

That sounded nice and comforting, but they had not got there yet, and it was not so easy as it 
sounds to find the Last Homely House west of the Mountains. There seemed to be no trees and no 
valleys and no hills to break the ground in front of them, only one vast slope going slowly up and up to 
meet the feet of the nearest mountain, a wide land the colour of heather and crumbling rock, with 
patches and slashes of grass-green and moss-green showing where water might be. 

Morning passed, afternoon came; but in all the silent waste there was no sign of any dwelling. They 
were growing anxious, for they saw now that the house might be hidden almost anywhere between 
them and the mountains. They came on unexpected valleys, narrow with steep sides, that opened 
suddenly at their feet, and they looked down surprised to see trees below them and running water at 
the bottom. There were gullies that they could almost leap over, but very deep with waterfalls in them. 


There were dark ravines that one could neither jump over nor climb into. There were bogs, some of 
them green pleasant places to look at, with flowers growing bright and tall; but a pony that walked 
there with a pack on its back would never have come out again. 

It was indeed a much wider land from the ford to the mountains than ever you would have guessed. 
Bilbo was astonished. The only path was marked with white stones, some of which were small, and 
others were half covered with moss or heather. Altogether it was a very slow business following the 
track, even guided by Gandalf, who seemed to know his way about pretty well. 

His head and beard wagged this way and that as he looked for the stones, and they followed his 
lead, but they seemed no nearer to the end of the search when the day began to fail. Tea-time had long 
gone by, and it seemed supper-time would soon do the same. There were moths fluttering about, and 
the light became very dim, for the moon had not risen. Bilbo’s pony began to stumble over roots and 
stones. They came to the edge of a steep fall in the ground so suddenly that Gandalf’ s horse nearly 
slipped down the slope. 

“Here it is at last!” he called, and the others gathered round him and looked over the edge. They 
saw a valley far below. They could hear the voice of hurrying water in a rocky bed at the bottom; the 
scent of trees was in the air; and there was a light on the valley-side across the water. 

Bilbo never forgot the way they slithered and slipped in the dusk down the steep zig-zag path into 
the secret valley of Rivendell. The air grew warmer as they got lower, and the smell of the pine-trees 
made him drowsy, so that every now and again he nodded and nearly fell off, or bumped his nose on 
the pony’s neck. Their spirits rose as they went down and down. The trees changed to beech and oak, 
and there was a comfortable feeling in the twilight. The last green had almost faded out of the grass, 
when they came at length to an open glade not far above the banks of the stream. 

“Hmmm! it smells like elves!” thought Bilbo, and he looked up at the stars. They were burning 
bright and blue. Just then there came a burst of song like laughter in the trees: 


O! What are you doing, 

And where are you going? 
Your ponies need shoeing! 
The river is flowing! 

O! tra-la-la-lally 

here down in the valley! 


O! What are you seeking, 
And where are you making? 
The faggots are reeking, 

The bannocks are baking! 
O! tril-lil-lil-lolly 
the valley is jolly, 
ha! ha! 


O! Where are you going 
With beards all a-wagging? 
No knowing, no knowing 



What brings Mister Baggins 
And Balin and Dwalin 
down into the valley 
in June 
ha! ha! 


O! Will you be staying, 

Or will you be flying? 

Your ponies are straying! 
The daylight is dying! 

To fly would be folly, 

To stay would be jolly 
And listen and hark 
Till the end of the dark 
to our tune 
ha! ha! 


So they laughed and sang in the trees; and pretty fair nonsense I daresay you think it. Not that they 
would care; they would only laugh all the more if you told them so. They were elves of course. Soon 
Bilbo caught glimpses of them as the darkness deepened. He loved elves, though he seldom met them; 
but he was a little frightened of them too. Dwarves don’t get on well with them. Even decent enough 
dwarves like Thorin and his friends think them foolish (which is a very foolish thing to think), or get 
annoyed with them. For some elves tease them and laugh at them, and most of all at their beards. 

“Well, well!” said a voice. “Just look! Bilbo the hobbit on a pony, my dear! Isn’t it delicious!” 

“Most astonishing wonderful!” 

Then off they went into another song as ridiculous as the one I have written down in full. At last 
one, a tall young fellow, came out from the trees and bowed to Gandalf and to Thorin. 

“Welcome to the valley!” he said. 

“Thank you!” said Thorin a bit gruffly; but Gandalf was already off his horse and among the elves, 
talking merrily with them. 

“You are a little out of your way,” said the elf: “that is, if you are making for the only path across 
the water and to the house beyond. We will set you right, but you had best get on foot, until you are 
over the bridge. Are you going to stay a bit and sing with us, or will you go straight on? Supper is 
preparing over there,” he said. “I can smell the wood-fires for the cooking.” 

Tired as he was, Bilbo would have liked to stay a while. Elvish singing is not a thing to miss, in 
June under the stars, not if you care for such things. Also he would have liked to have a few private 
words with these people that seemed to know his names and all about him, although he had never seen 
them before. He thought their opinion of his adventure might be interesting. Elves know a lot and are 
wondrous folk for news, and know what is going on among the peoples of the land, as quick as water 
flows, or quicker. 

But the dwarves were all for supper as soon as possible just then, and would not stay. On they all 
went, leading their ponies, till they were brought to a good path and so at last to the very brink of the 
river. It was flowing fast and noisily, as mountain-streams do of a summer evening, when sun has 
been all day on the snow far up above. There was only a narrow bridge of stone without a parapet, as 



narrow as a pony could well walk on; and over that they had to go, slow and careful, one by one, each 
leading his pony by the bridle. The elves had brought bright lanterns to the shore, and they sang a 
merry song as the party went across. 

“Don’t dip your beard in the foam, father!” they cried to Thorin, who was bent almost on to his 
hands and knees. “It is long enough without watering it.” 

“Mind Bilbo doesn’t eat all the cakes!” they called. “He is too fat to get through key-holes yet!” 
“Hush, hush! Good People! and good night!” said Gandalf, who came last. “Valleys have ears, and 
some elves have over merry tongues. Good night!” 

And so at last they all came to the Last Homely House, and found its doors flung wide. 


Now it is a strange thing, but things that are good to have and days that are good to spend are soon 
told about, and not much to listen to; while things that are uncomfortable, palpitating, and even 
gruesome, may make a good tale, and take a deal of telling anyway. They stayed long in that good 
house, fourteen days at least, and they found it hard to leave. Bilbo would gladly have stopped there 
for ever and ever — even supposing a wish would have taken him right back to his hobbit-hole without 
trouble. Yet there is little to tell about their stay. 

The master of the house was an elf-friend — one of those people whose fathers came into the 
strange stories before the beginning of History, the wars of the evil goblins and the elves and the first 
men in the North. In those days of our tale there were still some people who had both elves and heroes 
of the North for ancestors, and Elrond the master of the house was their chief. 

He was as noble and as fair in face as an elf-lord, as strong as a warrior, as wise as a wizard, as 
venerable as a king of dwarves, and as kind as summer. He comes into many tales, but his part in the 
story of Bilbo’s great adventure is only a small one, though important, as you will see, if we ever get 
to the end of it. His house was perfect, whether you liked food, or sleep, or work, or story-telling, or 
singing, or just sitting and thinking best, or a pleasant mixture of them all. Evil things did not come 
into that valley. 

I wish I had time to tell you even a few of the tales or one or two of the songs that they heard in 
that house. All of them, the ponies as well, grew refreshed and strong in a few days there. Their 
clothes were mended as well as their bruises, their tempers and their hopes. Their bags were filled 
with food and provisions light to carry but strong to bring them over the mountain passes. Their plans 
were improved with the best advice. So the time came to midsummer eve, and they were to go on 
again with the early sun on midsummer morning. 

Elrond knew all about runes of every kind. That day he looked at the swords they had brought from 
the trolls’ lair, and he said: “These are not troll-make. They are old swords, very old swords of the 
High Elves of the West, my kin. They were made in Gondolin for the Goblin-wars. They must have 
come from a dragon’s hoard or goblin plunder, for dragons and goblins destroyed that city many ages 
ago. This, Thorin, the runes name Orcrist, the Goblin-cleaver in the ancient tongue of Gondolin; it was 
a famous blade. This, Gandalf, was Glamdring, Foe-hammer that the king of Gondolin once wore. 
Keep them well!” 

“Whence did the trolls get them, I wonder?” said Thorin looking at his sword with new interest. 

“I could not say,” said Elrond, “but one may guess that your trolls had plundered other plunderers, 
or come on the remnants of old robberies in some hold in the mountains. I have heard that there are 
still forgotten treasures of old to be found in the deserted caverns of the mines of Moria, since the 



dwarf and goblin war.” 

Thorin pondered these words. “I will keep this sword in honour,” he said. “May it soon cleave 
goblins once again!” 

“A wish that is likely to be granted soon enough in the mountains!” said Elrond. “But show me now 
your map!” 

He took it and gazed long at it, and he shook his head; for if he did not altogether approve of 
dwarves and their love of gold, he hated dragons and their cruel wickedness, and he grieved to 
remember the ruin of the town of Dale and its merry bells, and the burned banks of the bright River 
Running. The moon was shining in a broad silver crescent. He held up the map and the white light 
shone through it. “What is this?” he said. “There are moon-letters here, beside the plain runes which 
say ‘five feet high the door and three may walk abreast.’” 

“What are moon-letters?” asked the hobbit full of excitement. He loved maps, as I have told you 
before; and he also liked runes and letters and cunning handwriting, though when he wrote himself it 
was a bit thin and spidery. 

“Moon-letters are rune-letters, but you cannot see them,” said Elrond, “not when you look straight 
at them. They can only be seen when the moon shines behind them, and what is more, with the more 
cunning sort it must be a moon of the same shape and season as the day when they were written. The 
dwarves invented them and wrote them with silver pens, as your friends could tell you. These must 
have been written on a midsummer’s eve in a crescent moon, a long while ago.” 

“What do they say?” asked Gandalf and Thorin together, a bit vexed perhaps that even Elrond 
should have found this out first, though really there had not been a chance before, and there would not 
have been another until goodness knows when. 

“ Stand by the grey stone when the thrush knocks. ” read Elrond, “and the setting sun with the last 
light of Durin’s Day will shine upon the key-hole.” 

“Durin, Durin!” said Thorin. “He was the father of the fathers of the eldest race of Dwarves, the 
Longbeards, and my first ancestor: I am his heir.” 

“Then what is Durin’s Day?” asked Elrond. 

“The first day of the dwarves’ New Year,” said Thorin, “is as all should know the first day of the 
last moon of Autumn on the threshold of Winter. We still call it Durin’s Day when the last moon of 
Autumn and the sun are in the sky together. But this will not help us much, I fear, for it passes our 
skill in these days to guess when such a time will come again.” 

“That remains to be seen,” said Gandalf. “Is there any more writing?” 

“None to be seen by this moon,” said Elrond, and he gave the map back to Thorin; and then they 
went down to the water to see the elves dance and sing upon the midsummer’s eve. 

The next morning was a midsummer’s morning as fair and fresh as could be dreamed: blue sky and 
never a cloud, and the sun dancing on the water. Now they rode away amid songs of farewell and good 
speed, with their hearts ready for more adventure, and with a knowledge of the road they must follow 
over the Misty Mountains to the land beyond. 


Chapter IV 


OVER HILL AND UNDER HILL 


There were many paths that led up into those mountains, and many passes over them. But most of the 
paths were cheats and deceptions and led nowhere or to bad ends; and most of the passes were infested 
by evil things and dreadful dangers. The dwarves and the hobbit, helped by the wise advice of Elrond 
and the knowledge and memory of Gandalf, took the right road to the right pass. 

Long days after they had climbed out of the valley and left the Last Homely House miles behind, 
they were still going up and up and up. It was a hard path and a dangerous path, a crooked way and a 
lonely and a long. Now they could look back over the lands they had left, laid out behind them far 
below. Lar, far away in the West, where things were blue and faint, Bilbo knew there lay his own 
country of safe and comfortable things, and his little hobbit-hole. He shivered. It was getting bitter 
cold up here, and the wind came shrill among the rocks. Boulders, too, at times came galloping down 
the mountain-sides, let loose by mid-day sun upon the snow, and passed among them (which was 
lucky), or over their heads (which was alarming). The nights were comfortless and chill, and they did 
not dare to sing or talk too loud, for the echoes were uncanny, and the silence seemed to dislike being 
broken — except by the noise of water and the wail of wind and the crack of stone. 

“The summer is getting on down below,” thought Bilbo, “and haymaking is going on and picnics. 
They will be harvesting and blackberrying, before we even begin to go down the other side at this 
rate.” And the others were thinking equally gloomy thoughts, although when they had said good-bye to 
Elrond in the high hope of a midsummer morning, they had spoken gaily of the passage of the 
mountains, and of riding swift across the lands beyond. They had thought of coming to the secret door 
in the Lonely Mountain, perhaps that very next last moon of Autumn — “and perhaps it will be Durin’s 
Day” they had said. Only Gandalf had shaken his head and said nothing. Dwarves had not passed that 
way for many years, but Gandalf had, and he knew how evil and danger had grown and thriven in the 
Wild, since the dragons had driven men from the lands, and the goblins had spread in secret after the 
battle of the Mines of Moria. Even the good plans of wise wizards like Gandalf and of good friends 
like Elrond go astray sometimes when you are off on dangerous adventures over the Edge of the Wild; 
and Gandalf was a wise enough wizard to know it. 


He knew that something unexpected might happen, and he hardly dared to hope that they would pass 
without fearful adventure over those great tall mountains with lonely peaks and valleys where no king 
ruled. They did not. All was well, until one day they met a thunderstorm — more than a thunderstorm, a 
thunder-battle. You know how terrific a really big thunderstorm can be down in the land and in a 
river-valley; especially at times when two great thunderstorms meet and clash. More terrible still are 
thunder and lightning in the mountains at night, when storms come up from East and West and make 
war. The lightning splinters on the peaks, and rocks shiver, and great crashes split the air and go 
rolling and tumbling into every cave and hollow; and the darkness is filled with overwhelming noise 
and sudden light. 


Bilbo had never seen or imagined anything of the kind. They were high up in a narrow place, with a 
dreadful fall into a dim valley at one side of them. There they were sheltering under a hanging rock for 
the night, and he lay beneath a blanket and shook from head to toe. When he peeped out in the 
lightning-flashes, he saw that across the valley the stone-giants were out, and were hurling rocks at 
one another for a game, and catching them, and tossing them down into the darkness where they 
smashed among the trees far below, or splintered into little bits with a bang. Then came a wind and a 
rain, and the wind whipped the rain and the hail about in every direction, so that an overhanging rock 
was no protection at all. Soon they were getting drenched and their ponies were standing with their 
heads down and their tails between their legs, and some of them were whinnying with fright. They 
could hear the giants guffawing and shouting all over the mountainsides. 

“This won’t do at all!” said Thorin. “If we don’t get blown off, or drowned, or struck by lightning, 
we shall be picked up by some giant and kicked sky-high for a football.” 




The Mountain-path 


“Well, if you know of anywhere better, take us there!” said Gandalf, who was feeling very grumpy, 





and was far from happy about the giants himself. 

The end of their argument was that they sent Fili and Kili to look for a better shelter. They had very 
sharp eyes, and being the youngest of the dwarves by some fifty years they usually got these sort of 
jobs (when everybody could see that it was absolutely no use sending Bilbo). There is nothing like 
looking, if you want to find something (or so Thorin said to the young dwarves). You certainly usually 
find something, if you look, but it is not always quite the something you were after. So it proved on 
this occasion. 

Soon Fili and Kili came crawling back, holding on to the rocks in the wind. “We have found a dry 
cave,” they said, “not far round the next corner; and ponies and all could get inside.” 

“Have you thoroughly explored it?” said the wizard, who knew that caves up in the mountains were 
seldom unoccupied. 

“Yes, yes!” they said, though everybody knew they could not have been long about it; they had 
come back too quick. “It isn’t all that big, and it does not go far back.” 

That, of course, is the dangerous part about caves: you don’t know how far they go back, 
sometimes, or where a passage behind may lead to, or what is waiting for you inside. But now Fili and 
Kili’s news seemed good enough. So they all got up and prepared to move. The wind was howling and 
the thunder still growling, and they had a business getting themselves and their ponies along. Still it 
was not very far to go, and before long they came to a big rock standing out into the path. If you 
stepped behind, you found a low arch in the side of the mountain. There was just room to get the 
ponies through with a squeeze, when they had been unpacked and unsaddled. As they passed under the 
arch, it was good to hear the wind and the rain outside instead of all about them, and to feel safe from 
the giants and their rocks. But the wizard was taking no risks. He lit up his wand — as he did that day in 
Bilbo’s dining-room that seemed so long ago, if you remember — , and by its light they explored the 
cave from end to end. 

It seemed quite a fair size, but not too large and mysterious. It had a dry floor and some 
comfortable nooks. At one end there was room for the ponies; and there they stood (mighty glad of the 
change) steaming, and champing in their nosebags. Oin and Gloin wanted to light a fire at the door to 
dry their clothes, but Gandalf would not hear of it. So they spread out their wet things on the floor, and 
got dry ones out of their bundles; then they made their blankets comfortable, got out their pipes and 
blew smoke rings, which Gandalf turned into different colours and set dancing up by the roof to amuse 
them. They talked and talked, and forgot about the storm, and discussed what each would do with his 
share of the treasure (when they got it, which at the moment did not seem so impossible); and so they 
dropped off to sleep one by one. And that was the last time that they used the ponies, packages, 
baggages, tools and paraphernalia that they had brought with them. 

It turned out a good thing that night that they had brought little Bilbo with them, after all. For, 
somehow, he could not go to sleep for a long while; and when he did sleep, he had very nasty dreams. 
He dreamed that a crack in the wall at the back of the cave got bigger and bigger, and opened wider 
and wider, and he was very afraid but could not call out or do anything but lie and look. Then he 
dreamed that the floor of the cave was giving way, and he was slipping — beginning to fall down, 
down, goodness knows where to. 

At that he woke up with a horrible start, and found that part of his dream was true. A crack had 
opened at the back of the cave, and was already a wide passage. He was just in time to see the last of 
the ponies’ tails disappearing into it. Of course he gave a very loud yell, as loud a yell as a hobbit can 
give, which is surprising for their size. 

Out jumped the goblins, big goblins, great ugly-looking goblins, lots of goblins, before you could 



say rocks and blocks. There were six to each dwarf, at least, and two even for Bilbo; and they were all 
grabbed and carried through the crack, before you could say tinder and flint. But not Gandalf. Bilbo’s 
yell had done that much good. It had wakened him up wide in a splintered second, and when goblins 
came to grab him, there was a terrific flash like lightning in the cave, a smell like gunpowder, and 
several of them fell dead. 

The crack closed with a snap, and Bilbo and the dwarves were on the wrong side of it! Where was 
Gandalf? Of that neither they nor the goblins had any idea, and the goblins did not wait to find out. 
They seized Bilbo and the dwarves and hurried them along. It was deep, deep, dark, such as only 
goblins that have taken to living in the heart of the mountains can see through. The passages there 
were crossed and tangled in all directions, but the goblins knew their way, as well as you do to the 
nearest post-office; and the way went down and down, and it was most horribly stuffy. The goblins 
were very rough, and pinched unmercifully, and chuckled and laughed in their horrible stony voices; 
and Bilbo was more unhappy even than when the troll had picked him up by his toes. He wished again 
and again for his nice bright hobbit-hole. Not for the last time. 

Now there came a glimmer of a red light before them. The goblins began to sing, or croak, keeping 
time with the flap of their flat feet on the stone, and shaking their prisoners as well. 


Clap! Snap! the black crack! 
Grip, grab! Pinch, nab! 

And down down to Goblin-town 
You go, my lad! 


Clash, crash! Crush, smash! 

Hammer and tongs! Knocker and gongs! Pound, pound, far underground! 
Ho, ho! my lad! 


Swish, smack! Whip crack! 

Batter and beat! Yammer and bleat! Work, work! Nor dare to shirk, 

While Goblins quaff, and Goblins laugh, Round and round far underground 
Below, my lad! 


It sounded truly terrifying. The walls echoed to the clap, snap! and the crush, smash ! and to the 
ugly laughter of their ho, ho! my lad! The general meaning of the song was only too plain; for now the 
goblins took out whips and whipped them with a swish, smack!, and set them running as fast as they 
could in front of them; and more than one of the dwarves were already yammering and bleating like 
anything, when they stumbled into a big cavern. 

It was lit by a great red fire in the middle, and by torches along the walls, and it was full of goblins. 
They all laughed and stamped and clapped their hands, when the dwarves (with poor little Bilbo at the 
back and nearest to the whips) came running in, while the goblin-drivers whooped and cracked their 
whips behind. The ponies were already there huddled in a corner; and there were all the baggages and 
packages lying broken open, and being rummaged by goblins, and smelt by goblins, and fingered by 
goblins, and quarrelled over by goblins. 



I am afraid that was the last they ever saw of those excellent little ponies, including a jolly sturdy 
little white fellow that Elrond had lent to Gandalf, since his horse was not suitable for the mountain- 
paths. For goblins eat horses and ponies and donkeys (and other much more dreadful things), and they 
are always hungry. Just now however the prisoners were thinking only of themselves. The goblins 
chained their hands behind their backs and linked them all together in a line, and dragged them to the 
far end of the cavern with little Bilbo tugging at the end of the row. 

There in the shadows on a large flat stone sat a tremendous goblin with a huge head, and armed 
goblins were standing round him carrying the axes and the bent swords that they use. Now goblins are 
cruel, wicked, and bad-hearted. They make no beautiful things, but they make many clever ones. They 
can tunnel and mine as well as any but the most skilled dwarves, when they take the trouble, though 
they are usually untidy and dirty. Hammers, axes, swords, daggers, pickaxes, tongs, and also 
instruments of torture, they make very well, or get other people to make to their design, prisoners and 
slaves that have to work till they die for want of air and light. It is not unlikely that they invented 
some of the machines that have since troubled the world, especially the ingenious devices for killing 
large numbers of people at once, for wheels and engines and explosions always delighted them, and 
also not working with their own hands more than they could help; but in those days and those wild 
parts they had not advanced (as it is called) so far. They did not hate dwarves especially, no more than 
they hated everybody and everything, and particularly the orderly and prosperous; in some parts 
wicked dwarves had even made alliances with them. But they had a special grudge against Thorin’ s 
people, because of the war which you have heard mentioned, but which does not come into this tale; 
and anyway goblins don’t care who they catch, as long as it is done smart and secret, and the prisoners 
are not able to defend themselves. 

“Who are these miserable persons?” said the Great Goblin. 

“Dwarves, and this!” said one of the drivers, pulling at Bilbo’s chain so that he fell forward onto 
his knees. “We found them sheltering in our Front Porch.” 

“What do you mean by it?” said the Great Goblin turning to Thorin. “Up to no good, I’ll warrant! 
Spying on the private business of my people, I guess! Thieves, I shouldn’t be surprised to learn! 
Murderers and friends of Elves, not unlikely! Come! What have you got to say?” 

“Thorin the dwarf at your service!” he replied — it was merely a polite nothing. “Of the things 
which you suspect and imagine we had no idea at all. We sheltered from a storm in what seemed a 
convenient cave and unused; nothing was further from our thoughts than inconveniencing goblins in 
any way whatever.” That was true enough! 

“Um!” said the Great Goblin. “So you say! Might I ask what you were doing up in the mountains at 
all, and where you were coming from, and where you were going to? In fact I should like to know all 
about you. Not that it will do you much good, Thorin Oakenshield, I know too much about your folk 
already; but let’s have the truth, or I will prepare something particularly uncomfortable for you!” 

“We were on a journey to visit our relatives, our nephews and nieces, and first, second, and third 
cousins, and the other descendants of our grandfathers, who live on the East side of these truly 
hospitable mountains,” said Thorin, not quite knowing what to say all at once in a moment, when 
obviously the exact truth would not do at all. 

“He is a liar, O truly tremendous one!” said one of the drivers. “Several of our people were struck 
by lightning in the cave, when we invited these creatures to come below; and they are as dead as 
stones. Also he has not explained this!” He held out the sword which Thorin had worn, the sword 
which came from the Trolls’ lair. 

The Great Goblin gave a truly awful howl of rage when he looked at it, and all his soldiers gnashed 



their teeth, clashed their shields, and stamped. They knew the sword at once. It had killed hundreds of 
goblins in its time, when the fair elves of Gondolin hunted them in the hills or did battle before their 
walls. They had called it Orcrist, Goblin-cleaver, but the goblins called it simply Biter. They hated it 
and hated worse any one that carried it. 

“Murderers and elf-friends!” the Great Goblin shouted. “Slash them! Beat them! Bite them! Gnash 
them! Take them away to dark holes full of snakes, and never let them see the light again!” He was in 
such a rage that he jumped off his seat and himself rushed at Thorin with his mouth open. 

Just at that moment all the lights in the cavern went out, and the great fire went off poof! into a 
tower of blue glowing smoke, right up to the roof, that scattered piercing white sparks all among the 
goblins. 

The yells and yammering, croaking, jibbering and jabbering; howls, growls and curses; shrieking 
and skriking, that followed were beyond description. Several hundred wild cats and wolves being 
roasted slowly alive together would not have compared with it. The sparks were burning holes in the 
goblins, and the smoke that now fell from the roof made the air too thick for even their eyes to see 
through. Soon they were falling over one another and rolling in heaps on the floor, biting and kicking 
and fighting as if they had all gone mad. 

Suddenly a sword flashed in its own light. Bilbo saw it go right through the Great Goblin as he 
stood dumbfounded in the middle of his rage. He fell dead, and the goblin soldiers fled before the 
sword shrieking into the darkness. 

The sword went back into its sheath. “Follow me quick!” said a voice fierce and quiet; and before 
Bilbo understood what had happened he was trotting along again, as fast as he could trot, at the end of 
the line, down more dark passages with the yells of the goblin-hall growing fainter behind him. A pale 
light was leading them on. 

“Quicker, quicker!” said the voice. “The torches will soon be relit.” 

“Half a minute!” said Dori, who was at the back next to Bilbo, and a decent fellow. He made the 
hobbit scramble on his shoulders as best he could with his tied hands, and then off they all went at a 
run, with a clink-clink of chains, and many a stumble, since they had no hands to steady themselves 
with. Not for a long while did they stop, and by that time they must have been right down in the very 
mountain’s heart. 

Then Gandalf lit up his wand. Of course it was Gandalf; but just then they were too busy to ask how 
he got there. He took out his sword again, and again it flashed in the dark by itself. It burned with a 
rage that made it gleam if goblins were about; now it was bright as blue flame for delight in the killing 
of the great lord of the cave. It made no trouble whatever of cutting through the goblin-chains and 
setting all the prisoners free as quickly as possible. This sword’s name was Glamdring the Foe- 
hammer, if you remember. The goblins just called it Beater, and hated it worse than Biter if possible. 
Orcrist, too, had been saved; for 

Gandalf had brought it along as well, snatching it from one of the terrified guards. Gandalf thought 
of most things; and though he could not do everything, he could do a great deal for friends in a tight 
corner. 

“Are we all here?” said he, handing his sword back to Thorin with a bow. “Let me see: one — that’s 
Thorin; two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven; where are Fili and Kili? Here they 
are! twelve, thirteen — and here’s Mr. Baggins: fourteen! Well, well! it might be worse, and then again 
it might be a good deal better. No ponies, and no food, and no knowing quite where we are, and hordes 
of angry goblins just behind! On we go!” 

On they went. Gandalf was quite right: they began to hear goblin noises and horrible cries far 



behind in the passages they had come through. That sent them on faster than ever, and as poor Bilbo 
could not possibly go half as fast — for dwarves can roll along at a tremendous pace, I can tell you, 
when they have to — they took it in turn to carry him on their backs. 

Still goblins go faster than dwarves, and these goblins knew the way better (they had made the 
paths themselves), and were madly angry; so that do what they could the dwarves heard the cries and 
howls getting closer and closer. Soon they could hear even the flap of the goblin feet, many many feet 
which seemed only just round the last corner. The blink of red torches could be seen behind them in 
the tunnel they were following; and they were getting deadly tired. 

“Why, O why did I ever leave my hobbit-hole!” said poor Mr. Baggins bumping up and down on 
Bombur’s back. 

“Why, O why did I ever bring a wretched little hobbit on a treasure hunt!” said poor Bombur, who 
was fat, and staggered along with the sweat dripping down his nose in his heat and terror. 

At this point Gandalf fell behind, and Thorin with him. They turned a sharp corner. “About turn!” 
he shouted. “Draw your sword Thorin!” 

There was nothing else to be done; and the goblins did not like it. They came scurrying round the 
corner in full cry, and found Goblin-cleaver, and Foe-hammer shining cold and bright right in their 
astonished eyes. The ones in front dropped their torches and gave one yell before they were killed. The 
ones behind yelled still more, and leaped back knocking over those that were running after them. 
“Biter and Beater!” they shrieked; and soon they were all in confusion, and most of them were 
hustling back the way they had come. 

It was quite a long while before any of them dared to turn that corner. By that time the dwarves had 
gone on again, a long, long, way on into the dark tunnels of the goblins’ realm. When the goblins 
discovered that, they put out their torches and they slipped on soft shoes, and they chose out their very 
quickest runners with the sharpest ears and eyes. These ran forward, as swift as weasels in the dark, 
and with hardly any more noise than bats. 

That is why neither Bilbo, nor the dwarves, nor even Gandalf heard them coming. Nor did they see 
them. But they were seen by the goblins that ran silently up behind, for Gandalf was letting his wand 
give out a faint light to help the dwarves as they went along. 

Quite suddenly Dori, now at the back again carrying Bilbo, was grabbed from behind in the dark. 

He shouted and fell; and the hobbit rolled off his shoulders into the blackness, bumped his head on 
hard rock, and remembered nothing more. 



Chapter V 


RIDDLES IN THE DARK 


When Bilbo opened his eyes, he wondered if he had; for it was just as dark as with them shut. No one 
was anywhere near him. Just imagine his fright! He could hear nothing, see nothing, and he could feel 
nothing except the stone of the floor. 

Very slowly he got up and groped about on all fours, till he touched the wall of the tunnel; but 
neither up nor down it could he find anything: nothing at all, no sign of goblins, no sign of dwarves. 
His head was swimming, and he was far from certain even of the direction they had been going in 
when he had his fall. He guessed as well as he could, and crawled along for a good way, till suddenly 
his hand met what felt like a tiny ring of cold metal lying on the floor of the tunnel. It was a turning 
point in his career, but he did not know it. He put the ring in his pocket almost without thinking; 
certainly it did not seem of any particular use at the moment. He did not go much further, but sat down 
on the cold floor and gave himself up to complete miserableness, for a long while. He thought of 
himself frying bacon and eggs in his own kitchen at home — for he could feel inside that it was high 
time for some meal or other; but that only made him miserabler. 

He could not think what to do; nor could he think what had happened; or why he had been left 
behind; or why, if he had been left behind, the goblins had not caught him; or even why his head was 
so sore. The truth was he had been lying quiet, out of sight and out of mind, in a very dark corner for a 
long while. 

After some time he felt for his pipe. It was not broken, and that was something. Then he felt for his 
pouch, and there was some tobacco in it, and that was something more. Then he felt for matches and 
he could not find any at all, and that shattered his hopes completely. Just as well for him, as he agreed 
when he came to his senses. Goodness knows what the striking of matches and the smell of tobacco 
would have brought on him out of dark holes in that horrible place. Still at the moment he felt very 
crushed. But in slapping all his pockets and feeling all round himself for matches his hand came on 
the hilt of his little sword — the little dagger that he got from the trolls, and that he had quite forgotten; 
nor fortunately had the goblins noticed it, as he wore it inside his breeches. 

Now he drew it out. It shone pale and dim before his eyes. “So it is an elvish blade, too,” he 
thought; “and goblins are not very near, and yet not far enough.” 

But somehow he was comforted. It was rather splendid to be wearing a blade made in Gondolin for 
the goblin-wars of which so many songs had sung; and also he had noticed that such weapons made a 
great impression on goblins that came upon them suddenly. 

“Go back?” he thought. “No good at all! Go sideways? Impossible! Go forward? Only thing to do! 
On we go!” So up he got, and trotted along with his little sword held in front of him and one hand 
feeling the wall, and his heart all of a patter and a pitter. 


Now certainly Bilbo was in what is called a tight place. But you must remember it was not quite so 
tight for him as it would have been for me or for you. Hobbits are not quite like ordinary people; and 


after all if their holes are nice cheery places and properly aired, quite different from the tunnels of the 
goblins, still they are more used to tunnelling than we are, and they do not easily lose their sense of 
direction underground — not when their heads have recovered from being bumped. Also they can move 
very quietly, and hide easily, and recover wonderfully from falls and bruises, and they have a fund of 
wisdom and wise sayings that men have mostly never heard or have forgotten long ago. 

I should not have liked to have been in Mr. Baggins’ place, all the same. The tunnel seemed to have 
no end. All he knew was that it was still going down pretty steadily and keeping in the same direction 
in spite of a twist and a turn or two. There were passages leading off to the side every now and then, as 
he knew by the glimmer of his sword, or could feel with his hand on the wall. Of these he took no 
notice, except to hurry past for fear of goblins or half-imagined dark things coming out of them. On 
and on he went, and down and down; and still he heard no sound of anything except the occasional 
whirr of a bat by his ears, which startled him at first, till it became too frequent to bother about. I do 
not know how long he kept on like this, hating to go on, not daring to stop, on, on, until he was tireder 
than tired. It seemed like all the way to tomorrow and over it to the days beyond. 

Suddenly without any warning he trotted splash into water! Ugh! it was icy cold. That pulled him 
up sharp and short. He did not know whether it was just a pool in the path, or the edge of an 
underground stream that crossed the passage, or the brink of a deep dark subterranean lake. The sword 
was hardly shining at all. He stopped, and he could hear, when he listened hard, drops drip-drip- 
dripping from an unseen roof into the water below; but there seemed no other sort of sound. 

“So it is a pool or a lake, and not an underground river,” he thought. Still he did not dare to wade 
out into the darkness. He could not swim; and he thought, too, of nasty slimy things, with big bulging 
blind eyes, wriggling in the water. There are strange things living in the pools and lakes in the hearts 
of mountains: fish whose fathers swam in, goodness only knows how many years ago, and never swam 
out again, while their eyes grew bigger and bigger and bigger from trying to see in the blackness; also 
there are other things more slimy than fish. Even in the tunnels and caves the goblins have made for 
themselves there are other things living unbeknown to them that have sneaked in from outside to lie 
up in the dark. Some of these caves, too, go back in their beginnings to ages before the goblins, who 
only widened them and joined them up with passages, and the original owners are still there in odd 
corners, slinking and nosing about. 
